.. _TS_search:

Transition State Search
=======================

ARC can automatically search for and validate transition states (TSs) for selected reaction types.
This section describes currently supported TS-search workflows and how to use them through ARC input files.

Neutral hydrolysis TS search
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

ARC supports automated TS generation and validation for **neutral hydrolysis reactions**.
This capability is designed to start from a high-level reaction definition (e.g., SMILES-defined reactants/products)
and proceed through TS generation, optimization, and validation without requiring manual TS construction.

Supported sub-families
""""""""""""""""""""""
The current implementation supports the following neutral hydrolysis sub-families:

- Ester hydrolysis
- Amide hydrolysis
- Acyl halide hydrolysis
- Ether hydrolysis
- Nitrile hydrolysis

How it is used
""""""""""""""
To run neutral hydrolysis TS search, define the reacting species and the overall reaction in the input file
(see ARC's examples folder for an input file that executes a neutral hydrolysis TS search).
At minimum, specify:

- The participating species (e.g., SMILES, xyz, InChI, or adjacency list)
- A reaction string connecting the species labels (e.g., ``A + H2O <=> products``)
- The TS generation adapter(s) under ``ts_adapters`` (in this case, use: ``['heuristics']``)
- The electronic structure levels used for optimization/validation (e.g., ``opt_level``, ``freq_level``, ``irc_level``)

What ARC does
""""""""""""""""""""""""""
For neutral hydrolysis reactions, ARC performs the following general steps:

1. Identify the relevant reactive atoms based on the reaction family definition.
2. Generate one or more chemically reasonable TS guesses for the hydrolysis transformation.
3. Optimize the TS candidates that passes internal filtration.
4. Validate the TS using vibrational frequency and IRC calculations.

Outputs and validation
""""""""""""""""""""""
Validated TS results are reported in the project output (log files and generated artifacts),
together with the supporting calculations (optimization, frequency, and IRC).
ARC does not require TS geometries to be isomorphic with a stored 2D adjacency list, since a TS does not have a
single strict graph representation. Instead, TS validation relies on TS-specific checks such as the imaginary
frequency, normal mode displacement analysis, IRC results, and energetic consistency.

Reference
"""""""""
A detailed description of the methodology, design choices, and validation benchmarks is provided in:
L. Fahoum, A. Grinberg Dana, *“Automated Reaction Transition State Search for Neutral Hydrolysis Reactions”*,
Digital Discovery, 2026.

CREST
^^^^^

CREST is an external conformational sampling tool used by ARC as a TS-search wrapper stage.
In ARC's current flow, CREST is applied to TS seeds generated by base TS search methods and uses
family-specific constraints from ARC.

Current ARC family support for CREST:

- ``H_Abstraction`` only (RMG family reference:
  `H_Abstraction <https://rmg.mit.edu/database/kinetics/families/H_Abstraction/>`_).

External references:

- `CREST documentation <https://crest-lab.github.io/crest-docs/>`_
- `CREST constrained sampling example <https://crest-lab.github.io/crest-docs/page/examples/example_4.html>`_

Wrapper Extension Guide
"""""""""""""""""""""""

Use this guide when extending CREST-based TS workflows in ARC (for example, adding hydrolysis support to CREST,
or allowing CREST to wrap a new TS seed source adapter).

ARC uses a neutral wrapper hub API for TS seed generation and wrapper-specific constraints:

- ``arc.job.adapters.ts.seed_hub.get_ts_seeds(...)``
- ``arc.job.adapters.ts.seed_hub.get_wrapper_constraints(...)``

Current status
""""""""""""""

- ``CrestAdapter`` requests seeds using ``base_adapter='heuristics'``.
- ``CrestAdapter`` requests constraints using ``wrapper='crest'``.
- CREST constraints are currently implemented for ``H_Abstraction`` only.
- Hydrolysis seeds can be generated by heuristics, but CREST constraints for hydrolysis are not implemented yet.

Seed schema contract
""""""""""""""""""""

``get_ts_seeds(...)`` returns a list of seed dictionaries with the following fields:

- ``xyz``: Cartesian coordinates dictionary.
- ``family``: Reaction family associated with the seed.
- ``method``: Method label for provenance.
- ``source_adapter``: TS-search adapter id that generated the seed.
- ``metadata``: Optional adapter-specific metadata dictionary.

Extension instructions: Add a new family to CREST
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

1. Update ``get_ts_seeds(...)`` logic in ``arc/job/adapters/ts/seed_hub.py`` only if the seed generation path changes.
2. Add family-specific CREST constraints in ``_get_crest_constraints(...)`` (or family helper it calls) in
   ``arc/job/adapters/ts/seed_hub.py``.
3. Add/update tests in ``arc/job/adapters/ts/heuristics_test.py`` (``TestHeuristicsHub``).
4. Update ``ts_adapters_by_rmg_family`` mapping if CREST should be enabled for that family.

Extension instructions: Let CREST wrap a new TS seed adapter
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

1. Add a ``base_adapter`` branch in ``get_ts_seeds(...)``.
2. Ensure the returned seed objects satisfy the seed schema contract.
3. Reuse ``get_wrapper_constraints(wrapper='crest', ...)`` with those seeds.
4. Add tests for the new adapter branch and constraints compatibility.

Minimal usage pattern
"""""""""""""""""""""

.. code-block:: python

    from arc.job.adapters.ts.seed_hub import get_ts_seeds, get_wrapper_constraints

    seeds = get_ts_seeds(
        reaction=rxn,
        base_adapter='heuristics',
        dihedral_increment=30,
    )
    for seed in seeds:
        crest_constraints = get_wrapper_constraints(
            wrapper='crest',
            reaction=rxn,
            seed=seed,
        )
        if crest_constraints is None:
            continue
        # run CREST with crest_constraints["A"], crest_constraints["H"], crest_constraints["B"]

.. include:: links.txt
